CONFIDENTIAL · INTERNAL · CRESCENT MOON ENGINEERING & FOUNDER OFFICE
ONLY · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
EYES
EVERYTHING YOU EVER SAID
The Chronic Layer
Build Directive
The direction, the order, and the non-negotiables for building
the understanding layer — while the live product stays
standing. Read this once, top to bottom. It is written to be
understood, not just executed.
DOCUMENT
Chronic Layer Build Directive
VERSION
v1.0 · Working Directive
DATE
25 June 2026
PREPARED FOR
Crescent Moon Engineering
FROM
EYES Founder Office
SCOPE
Perception Layer + Phases 1–4
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 1 / 21
00How to read this document
What this is, what it asks of you, and the few rules that govern everything below.
This directive sets the direction for the next stretch of work. It does not contain dates,
week counts, or who-does-what. You know your team and your pace better than anyone.
What this document fixes is the order of the work, the shape of each piece, and a small
set of rules that do not bend.
The work runs on two tracks at once. The live product — the thing 32 real people are already using
— stays standing and stays cared for. That is track one, and it is always priority one. In parallel,
starting now, we begin building the understanding layer underneath EYES. That is track two. Track
two never comes at the expense of track one. A broken live product loses people faster than a
missing feature wins them.
The order of track two is fixed. The pace is yours. If a phase finishes faster than expected, the next
one begins — the sequence does not change, but nothing waits for permission. And one rule sits
above all the phases, stated on the next page on its own, because it is the rule that protects
everything EYES is.
THE SINGLE OPERATING RULE THAT MATTERS MOST
The moment anything is built that a user can feel in the chat — a new kind of answer, a
relationship surfacing, an insight that wasn't possible yesterday — it ships that day, and I
am told. Do not batch it. Do not wait for the phase to be "complete." The chat is the product;
the instant the chat gets smarter, the user should get that, and the founder should know it
happened. Plug it in, push it, message me.
This document covers the Perception Layer and Phases 1 through 4 of the Chronic build. It stops
there deliberately. The organs above Phase 4 are real and they are coming, but they are direction,
not commitment — they are described in one short closing section and specced separately, when
the layers beneath them are stable.
A NOTE ON HOW THIS WAS WRITTEN
This is written for humans first — read it and the whole picture should sit in your head. It is
also written knowing it will be handed to an AI to help execute. So the tools are named, the
algorithms are named, the libraries are named, the schemas are written out explicitly, and the
verbs are real. There is no "leverage," no "optimize," no vague direction. Where a choice
was made, the alternatives we rejected and the reason are on the page, so the reasoning
travels with the instruction.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 2 / 21
THE ONE RULE WITH NO EXCEPTIONS
NON-NEGOTIABLE · EVERY PHASE · NO "LATER"
Everything carries its receipt.
Every entity, every relationship, every edge written into the graph — at every phase,
without exception — carries provenance back to the exact source record and the
exact span of text it was extracted from. If EYES knows it, EYES can show where it
learned it.
This is not a nice-to-have we add once the graph works. It is built in from the first record, because
it is the foundation the entire product stands on. EYES is the system that cites, that proves, that
holds you to what the record actually says. The whole promise — the reason a person trusts it over
a brilliant stranger like ChatGPT — is that it never makes a claim it cannot back.
Picture the failure if we skip it. The Chronic layer surfaces an insight: "you committed to this and let
it slip." The user, stung, says: "show me where I said that." If EYES cannot produce the exact
message, the exact line, the exact date — the trust does not just crack on that one insight. It
collapses across the entire product, retroactively, on every answer EYES has ever given. An
unanchored insight is worse than no insight. It is a liability wearing the costume of intelligence.
A claim without its source is not a feature. It is the exact thing
EYES exists to replace.
So: anchoring is in from record one. If an extracted relationship cannot point back to the text that
produced it, it does not enter the graph as a fact — it waits as a candidate until it can be grounded.
No engineer skips this in the name of speed. This is the place where correctness beats velocity,
every time, no discussion.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 3 / 21
01The architecture, in one picture
Where every piece of this build sits. Orientation before instruction.
EYES is one body with five layers. Data comes in raw, gets perceived, gets understood,
gets answered, and reaches the person. The understanding layer — Chronic — is where
this directive lives.
RAW TRUTH emails · messages · calendar · GitHub · Notion · docs
never deleted · never Chronic's job to remember
│
▼
PERCEPTION LAYER turns raw records into structured signal
also the retrieval layer — mostly already built
│
▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   CHRONIC  ·  the persistent understanding organism    │
│                                                      │
│    foundation    Entity →  Relationship →  Temporal →     │
│    (what is)     Behavior                             │
│                                                      │
│    interpretation  Drift →  Loops →  Contradiction →       │
│    (what moves)   Narrative                            │
│                                                      │
│    emergence     Identity →  Prediction                 │
│                                                      │
│    runs continuously · never sleeps                  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
│
▼
ACUTE interprets the question · selects context ·
retrieves · surfaces understanding · answers
│
▼
INTERFACE chat today · dashboard / brief / document tomorrow
Two things to hold about Chronic before the phases begin.
The order of the organs is itself meaningful.
The foundation organs answer what is — who and what exist (Entity), how they connect
(Relationship), when (Temporal), what's happening (Behavior). The interpretation organs answer
what's moving — what's drifting, what repeats, what conflicts, what story is forming. The
emergence organs answer what this is becoming. Each layer reads from the one below it. You build
bottom-up, and this directive covers the foundation — Entity, Relationship, the start of Temporal —
plus the Perception Layer that feeds it.
The substrate is locked.
Everything Chronic does runs on a bi-temporal knowledge graph. The engine is Graphiti; the graph
database underneath is Neo4j (community edition) or Kuzu — your call based on what the team is
comfortable operating, both are fine. "Bi-temporal" means every fact carries two timelines: when it
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 4 / 21
was true in the world, and when EYES learned it. This is not up for re-architecting. It is the decision
the whole stack assumes.
WHAT THIS DIRECTIVE COVERS — AND WHAT IT DOESN'T
Covered: the Perception Layer, the entity and relation schemas, and Phases 1–4 (extraction
quality, the Gmail foundation slice, multi-source expansion, and the first temporal and
community work). Deferred to a later directive: the interpretation and emergence organs —
Drift proper, Loops, Contradiction, Narrative, Identity, Prediction. They are described in one
closing section as direction only. Do not plan against them yet.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 5 / 21
02Two tracks, one team
How the live product and the new build run side by side without one starving the
other.
ATrack one — the live product stays standing
This is priority one, every day, no matter what is being built on track two. It is not background work
and it is not "when there's time." It is the floor.
BTrack two — the Chronic build, in parallel, starting now
Not "after the product is perfect." Now. The phases that follow are track two. They run alongside
track one, on whatever share of the team's attention is left once track one is genuinely safe.
THE SHIP-ON-READY RULE, RESTATED BECAUSE IT GOVERNS EVERYTHING
Whenever a piece of track two produces something a user can feel in the chat — a real
entity surfacing, a cross-source connection, a first insight that wasn't possible before — it
ships that day, and the founder is told the same day. The build is plug-and-play into the live
chat by design. Speed of shipping the felt improvement is the whole point of building in this
order.
CThe daily document
From this day forward, the team sends a short document every day. Same three sections, same
shape, every time:
The structure and the daily cadence are mandated. The mechanism — where it lives, how it's sent
— is yours to choose, as long as it arrives daily in this form. What it replaces is scattered status
across chat threads. One document, every day, same structure. That is the discipline.
FOUNDER-OWNED, NOT TEAM-OWNED
Monitoring, continuously. Who logs in, who returns, where they drop off in the flow. Server
load, response times, query performance. We need to see trouble before users do.
Bug triage with real windows. Anything users hit gets fixed inside a defined window — the most
severe same-day, the serious within a day or two, the minor within the week. The windows
matter more than their exact length; what cannot happen is a user-facing bug sitting untriaged.
Connector health. Gmail, GitHub, Notion, and Slack-when-throttling-allows stay synced and
stable. If one breaks or rate-limits, that is known and owned, not discovered by a user.
Visible polish. Onboarding refinements as we learn from real sessions, audit formatting, the
citation experience, any remaining text-rendering issues. This continues alongside everything.
What we did today — the work that happened.
What we finished today — what actually closed, shipped, or merged. Not "worked on." Finished.
What we're doing tomorrow — the next concrete moves.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 6 / 21
The entity schema and the relation schema — what kinds of things and what kinds of
connections EYES recognizes — are defined by the founder. A working v0 is written into this
document (Section 03B) so the team can begin immediately. It will be refined. The tools
below are configured against that schema, and they re-configure without a rebuild, so
refinement later is cheap.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 7 / 21
03The Perception Layer
The foundation that mostly already exists — and the retrieval layer the chat already
runs on.
Perception turns raw records into structured signal, and it is the same layer that
retrieves. Most of it is already built. The work is to formalize it, anchor it, and wire
it to feed the graph.
AWhat it is, and why it sits where it does
Between Raw Truth and Chronic sits the layer that observes. Its job is to take a raw record — a
Gmail message, a Notion note — and pull out the structured signal inside it: the mentions, the
events, the people, the actions, the commitments. It is the eye that sees before the brain
understands.
Here is the part that matters for sequencing, and the reason this section exists: the Perception
Layer is also the retrieval layer. The chunked search the team already built — chopping incoming
data into tagged, bite-sized pieces, running hybrid search that matches on meaning first and falls
back to exact then partial keywords, injecting the source and title into every chunk — that is
perception. Retrieval is the act of perceiving what's relevant in the raw corpus. It is not thrown
away in the Chronic build. It is named, kept, strengthened, and connected upward.
PERCEPTION feeds two paths — both matter
  raw record
      │
      ├──►   retrieval path   →   ACUTE direct lookup
      │       (chunk · embed ·      "find my last email to John"
      │        hybrid search)       answered from source, no graph needed
      │
      └──►   extraction path  →   ENTITY ENGINE input
             (entities · events ·   perceived entities become
              commitments pulled    resolved nodes in the graph
              from the text)
BThe work to do here
This is "little work" relative to the phases above, because the spine of it exists. Four concrete
things:
Formalize it as the named Perception Layer. The existing chunked-RAG retrieval becomes an
explicit, named layer with a defined output, not an undocumented pipeline. Everything above
reads from a known contract.
1
Anchor every chunk. Each chunk already carries source and title; extend that so every chunk
— and every signal extracted from it — points back to the exact record and character span.
This is the anchoring rule applied at the perception layer, where it begins.
2
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 8 / 21
Tools
No new substrate here — this is the existing embedding pipeline (OpenAI text-embedding-3-small
via the LiteLLM gateway alias auto-embed ) and the existing hybrid search. Strengthen and
formalize; do not replace.
WHY RETRIEVAL AND THE GRAPH ARE NOT THE SAME THING — AND WHY BOTH STAY
Retrieval answers "where is the thing I'm looking for" — it finds relevant records fast. The
graph answers "how does what we know connect and change." A question like "find my last
email to John" is pure retrieval; it never needs the graph. A question like "have I been pulling
away from John this year" needs the graph. Acute routes between them. Perception serves
retrieval; perception also feeds the graph. Both paths live, from the same layer.
DONE LOOKS LIKE
The retrieval layer is named and documented with a defined output contract; every chunk
and extracted signal carries provenance to its source record and span; perception's
extraction output is available as input to the Entity Engine; and retrieval quality in live chat
answers is measured and holding.
Hands off to → the Entity Engine (Phase 2), which takes the entities perception pulls from text and resolves them
into canonical, deduplicated nodes in the graph.
Wire perception's output to feed the Entity Engine. The entities and events the layer perceives
become the input the Entity Engine resolves into graph nodes (Phase 2). Today perception
feeds only retrieval; it must also feed extraction.
3
Keep retrieval quality high. Retrieval is what the user feels in every chat answer. The hybrid
search — meaning, then exact, then partial — stays and gets sharper. A better answer in chat
is a shippable, felt improvement, and it falls under the ship-on-ready rule.
4
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 9 / 21
04The schemas — v0, founder-owned
What kinds of things, and what kinds of connections, EYES recognizes. The DNA
every organ is built from.
The algorithms below are commodities — they exist, they're open-source, you adopt
them. The schema is the part that is uniquely EYES, and it is where the moat begins. A
generic system recognizes "person" and "works at." Only EYES recognizes
"commitment" and "delayed on" as first-class things. That choice is what makes every
interpretation organ above able to do something no one else can.
This is v0. It is enough to start configuring the tools today. It will be refined by the founder as real
user data shows which types actually matter. The tools reconfigure without a rebuild, so refinement
is cheap and expected.
AEntity types — the nouns
Each becomes a label the extraction model is given, and a node-type in the graph.
ENTITY TYPE WHAT IT CAPTURES
person A human — named or referenced — appearing in the records.
organization A company, team, institution, or group.
place A location — city, country, venue, region.
project A named effort or piece of work the person is engaged in.
commitment A thing the person said they would do. First-class, not a topic.
decision A choice the person made — including a choice against something.
goal A stated intention or aim, larger than a single commitment.
emotional_state An expressed feeling or state — anxious, excited, drained, resolved.
event Something that happened at a time — a meeting, a call, a milestone.
topic A subject the person engages with repeatedly.
document A referenced artifact — a file, a doc, a deck.
financial_transaction A money movement or financial event referenced in the records.
BRelation types — the connections
Each becomes a label the relation model is given, and a typed edge in the graph. The first group is
generic and useful; the second group is where EYES diverges from every generic knowledge
graph.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 10 / 21
Generic relations (useful, not the moat)
RELATION READS AS
works_at person →  organization
member_of person →  organization / team
located_in person / org →  place
discusses person →  topic / project
EYES-specific relations (where the moat lives)
RELATION READS AS
committed_to person made a commitment regarding a thing, project, or person
delayed_on a commitment with elapsed time and no action — the accountability signal
decided_against an active rejection, not merely an absence
mentioned_with_emotion a reference carrying emotional valence — positive, anxious, excited,
drained
depends_on one commitment or project blocked by another
conflicts_with two stated intentions in tension — feeds Contradiction later
referenced_alongside a co-occurrence pattern — feeds Narrative later
searched_for the user actively asked EYES about this — feeds the accountability layer
READ THIS BEFORE CONFIGURING ANYTHING
The EYES-specific relations are the reason the whole system is worth building. Any tool can
extract works_at. Only EYES decides that delayed_on is a real, first-class relationship in a
person's life — because only EYES is in the business of holding a person to what they said.
When configuring the relation model, these are not optional extras. They are the point.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 11 / 21
05Phase 1 — Extraction quality spike
Prove the extraction tools work on real EYES data before the whole foundation is built
on them.
Before committing the architecture to a toolchain, prove it produces good output
on one real corpus. The deliverable is a memo, not code that stays.
What it does, and why it comes first
The single biggest unknown in this entire build is whether the chosen extraction tools — GLiNER for
entities and GLiREL for relations — are good enough on real EYES data to be the foundation
everything else stands on. If extraction quality is poor, every organ above inherits the noise, and
we'd find that out months in. So we find out now, in a contained spike, before building broadly on
the assumption.
The approach
Take one user's full Gmail corpus — the founder's is the natural choice, it is dense and real. Run
GLiNER  across all of it with the v0 entity schema. Run GLiREL  on top to extract relations with the
v0 relation schema. Then look hard at the output and measure it: obvious misses, hallucinated
entities or relations that the text does not support, and cross-source duplicates. Write a one-page
memo: what worked, what didn't, where the quality cliff is, and a clear go / no-go on the toolchain.
Nothing built in this phase is meant to survive. It is a measurement instrument. Its only product is
the memo and the decision it produces.
Why these tools, and what we rejected
OPTION VERDICT REASON
GLiNER (entities)
+ GLiREL
(relations)
ADOPT Zero-shot — you define the labels (including commitment, decision) at
runtime. Runs locally on CPU, which means extraction happens on our own
infrastructure, not a third-party API per message. Right for privacy and cost.
spaCy reject Fixed schema. Excellent for person / org / place / date, but cannot treat
"commitment" or "decision" as entities — and those are the ones that
matter.
REBEL reject Locked to ~220 Wikidata relation types. The EYES-specific relations don't
exist in its vocabulary.
LLM-only
extraction
fallback Most capable, most expensive, and prone to hallucinating relations the text
doesn't support. Kept only as a fallback for genuinely ambiguous records —
never the primary path.
COST AT SCALE
GLiNER on CPU ≈  free  — it is compute time, no per-call API cost. The LLM fallback, used for
the small share of records where the local model's confidence is low, runs through the
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 12 / 21
existing auto-extract Gemini gateway alias and costs in the order of
pennies per user per month . This is the cheapest organ in the system.
DONE LOOKS LIKE
A written quality memo on the founder's Gmail corpus, with measured extraction quality (how
much it catches, how much it invents, how many duplicates it leaves), and a clear go / no-go
on the GLiNER + GLiREL toolchain. If quality is good, Phase 2 begins. If it is not, that surfaces
immediately — not silently months later.
Hands off to → Phase 2, which takes the proven toolchain and builds the real, permanent foundation on Gmail.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 13 / 21
06Phase 2 — The foundation slice on Gmail
Build the full entity →  relationship →  temporal foundation, end to end, on one source
only.
Thin and deep, not broad and shallow. One source, taken all the way through —
entities, relationships, time, evidence — before any second source is touched.
The instinct will be to do all sources at once, or to do entities everywhere before touching
relationships. Resist it. A complete, working Gmail-only graph — real nodes, typed edges, every
edge carrying its receipt — teaches more and de-risks more than a broad entity-only layer across
every connector. Gmail first, because it is the richest, densest source we have, OAuth is already
wired, and it is where commitment detection is strongest.
AThe Entity Engine — building the nouns
Three sub-jobs, in order: extract, resolve, store.
BThe Relationship Engine — building the connections
On top of the resolved nodes, GLiREL  extracts typed relations using the v0 relation schema. Two
disciplines are non-negotiable here:
CTemporal anchoring — putting every edge in time
Every edge in the graph carries four timestamps. This is the bi-temporal substrate doing its job:
one edge, fully time-stamped
  Sai  ── works_at ──►   JFrog
        valid_from   = 2020          // true in the world since
Extract — GLiNER  with the v0 entity schema pulls entities from each Gmail record. (The LLM
fallback via auto-extract handles the contextually weird cases the local model is unsure
about.)
Resolve — Graphiti 's built-in resolution runs on the stream, collapsing repeat mentions of the
same entity as data flows in. (Batch reconciliation with Splink waits for Phase 3, when multiple
sources make cross-source duplicates the real problem.)
Store — each entity becomes a node in the bi-temporal graph on Graphiti, with the graph DB
(Neo4j or Kuzu) underneath. Each node carries: a canonical ID, its alias forms, its evidence (the
records it appeared in, with source URLs), and an evolving summary.
Anchoring on every relation. Every extracted relation carries a pointer back to the exact text
span that produced it. A relation that cannot be grounded in source text does not enter the graph
as a fact — it waits as a candidate. This is the anchoring rule, enforced at the edge level.
A confidence threshold. GLiREL emits a confidence on each relation. Relations above roughly
0.7–0.8 are promoted into the graph; below that they are stored as candidates and not
surfaced. This is what prevents EYES ever claiming a connection the user didn't make.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 14 / 21
        valid_to     = null          // still true, for now
        observed_from = 2026-05-15    // when EYES learned it
        observed_to   = null          // still believed
        evidence     = gmail://msg/abc123
        confidence   = 0.94
later, a record says Sai left — the old edge is NOT deleted:
        valid_to     = 2026-11-15     // updated
        observed_to  = 2026-11-22     // superseded, but kept
The old fact is never deleted. It is marked superseded and stays in the graph, recoverable. A fact
that fades but remains in the body — the way memory actually works.
COST AT SCALE
GLiNER + GLiREL on CPU ≈  free. Graphiti, Neo4j community / Kuzu — open source, free.
The only running cost is the LLM fallback on the small share of ambiguous records — order
of €0.50–€2 per user per month . The foundation is almost entirely free to run.
DONE LOOKS LIKE
For one test user's Gmail: the graph contains resolved entity nodes and typed, evidenced,
time-stamped relationship edges. And the acceptance test that matters most — every chat
answer that references an entity or a relationship cites the exact source record it came from.
No claim without its receipt.
Hands off to → Phase 3, which extends this proven foundation across every source and makes the same entity
collapse no matter where it appears.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 15 / 21
07Phase 3 — Multi-source & cross-sourceresolution
Extend the foundation to every connector, and make one person be one node — no
matter where they appear.
The same extraction pipeline, now across all sources — plus the hard new problem:
the same entity, seen in many places, becoming a single node. This is where the
first major user-visible deliverable lands.
AExtend to the rest of the live connectors
The extraction itself is the same GLiNER + GLiREL pipeline, now run across GitHub, Notion, and
Slack (Slack as throttling allows — it stays de-emphasized in onboarding until the rate limit is
resolved). No new extraction machinery; the same tools, more sources.
BThe hard new problem — cross-source resolution
When Sai appears in Gmail, Sai Kumar in Notion, and saik@jfrog.com in a calendar invite — are
these one entity or three? If three, the graph is broken: every insight about Sai is split across
phantom duplicates. This is the entity-resolution problem, and it is solved with a two-layer pattern:
In this phase you bring Splink online, run it nightly, review its merge proposals, and tune the
threshold. This is unglamorous and uncompromising — it is the difference between 47 phantom
"Sai" nodes and one.
ADOPT — SPLINK
Probabilistic record linkage, proven at national-
statistics scale — links a million records on a laptop
in about a minute. Open source, free, runs on our
own infrastructure.
REJECT — DEDUPE.IO
Similar idea, smaller ceiling — known to hit memory
limits past roughly two million records. Fine for a
toy, wrong for a system meant to compound for
years.
CThe first major user-visible win — the Mindmap
This is where the existing Mindmap frontend work plugs into the new graph backend. The chunk-
cluster view is replaced by a real entity-relationship view — actual people, projects, and places,
with cross-source merging working, so one person shows up once with all their threads gathered.
This is the first time a user feels the Chronic layer in the chat. Under the ship-on-ready rule, it ships
the day it works.
Streaming layer — Graphiti 's built-in resolution catches the easy merges as data flows in.
Batch layer — Splink  runs nightly across the full graph, reconciling the harder cases. It uses
a probabilistic record-linkage model (Fellegi-Sunter): for each candidate pair it computes the
probability they're the same entity from each field's match strength — name similarity, date
overlap, exact email match — produces a probability, and clusters matches above a threshold
into one entity.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 16 / 21
COST AT SCALE
Splink, Graphiti, Neo4j / Kuzu — all open source, all free, all on our own infrastructure.
The nightly Splink batch runs on a small VM. No new per-user cost beyond the same small
extraction fallback from Phase 2.
DONE LOOKS LIKE
For the test user, when the same person appears in Gmail and Notion, they collapse to one
node in the graph — and the Mindmap UI shows it correctly, real entities with cross-source
merging visible. The migration story is handled: existing data flows into the new graph without
disrupting the live users.
Hands off to → Phase 4, which asks the graph its first questions about change over time and surfaces the first
thing EYES could not say before.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 17 / 21
08Phase 4 — Temporal aggregation &community detection
Make the graph answer questions about change — and say the first thing it couldn't
say yesterday.
The foundation is real and multi-source. Now it learns to reason over time, to find
the natural clusters in a life, and to surface the first true signal of change.
ATemporal aggregation
The first temporal questions are not machine learning — they are queries on the graph we already
have. Count of mentions(person →  "France") per week, per month. Count of new
committed_to edges per week. Median age of edges whose valid_to is still null, grouped by
relation type — in plain terms, how long commitments sit open without action. These are graph
queries (Cypher or SQL), cheap and fast, no new models.
BCommunity detection
Once there are hundreds of typed edges, the question becomes: which entities cluster together into
meaningful groups? One cluster might be the build team — the founder, the project, the engineers,
bound by works_with and discusses. Another might be the France question — the person, a
place, a visa, parents, money, bound by mentions and worries_about. Community detection
makes these visible without anyone predefining them.
ADOPT — LEIDEN
Runs nightly against the full graph. Produces well-
connected, internally-coherent clusters; fast at our
scale; already used under the hood by Graphiti.
Cluster IDs are stored as their own node type.
REJECT — LOUVAIN
The older method Leiden improves on. Known to
produce internally-disconnected communities —
clusters that aren't actually one thing. Leiden's
refinement step fixes exactly this.
Cluster names are surfaced to the user for validation — the moment the user names their own
clusters, which is one of the most important validation moments in the whole product. The system
finds the shape; the person gives it meaning.
CEdge decay & the first contradiction handling
The decay discipline becomes concrete here: when a new edge contradicts an old one, the old one
is not deleted — it gets its valid_to set and an is_contradicted_by pointer to the newer edge.
The graph keeps an audit of how it evolved. Same (head, relation, tail) asserted twice with
a conflict is the structural signature the Contradiction organ will later read.
DThe first drift signal — the first new thing EYES says
Nothing elaborate yet: count-based change detection on entity-mention frequency. "You mentioned
France 47 times last year and 12 times this year — that pattern has changed." This is the Drift
organ in its most primitive form, and it is the first time EYES tells the user something it could not
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 18 / 21
have told them before the Chronic layer existed. Under the ship-on-ready rule, the day it works in
chat, it ships.
COST AT SCALE
Leiden, temporal queries — free, on our own infrastructure.  Temporal aggregation is
graph queries, not inference. Community detection is a nightly batch on a small VM. No new
per-user API cost.
DONE LOOKS LIKE
The graph answers temporal questions (mention rates over time, open-commitment age);
Leiden clusters run nightly and surface named communities for the user to validate;
superseded edges are marked, not deleted, with contradiction pointers; and the first count-
based drift signal surfaces in live chat.
Hands off to → the interpretation and emergence organs — described next as direction only, specced separately
when this layer is stable.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 19 / 21
09Beyond Phase 4 — direction, notcommitment
What the foundation is being built toward. Named here so the destination is clear; not
planned against yet.
Everything above builds the foundation — the what is. What follows is the rest of the
organism. It is real, it is where EYES becomes singular, and it is not committed in this
directive. Each of these begins only when the layers beneath it are stable and trusted.
They will be specced in their own directive. Do not plan, estimate, or build against them
yet — they are here so the team can see what the foundation is for.
›The interpretation organs — what's moving
›The emergence organs — what this is becoming
THE DISCIPLINE THAT PROTECTS ALL OF IT
These organs are the most powerful and the least solved. They depend entirely on the
quality of the foundation below them. Building them on a shaky foundation produces
confident nonsense — the worst possible outcome for a product whose entire value is being
trustworthy about a person's own life. The foundation comes first, all the way, before any of
this. That is the whole reason for the order in this document.
Drift, proper. Beyond count-based change: genuine change-point detection and distribution-shift
methods on the time series the graph produces — the direction of change, statistically
grounded, separated from noise.
Loops. Sequence-pattern mining over ordered behavior — the recurring structures a person
runs without seeing them. Big idea →  deep research →  build →  launch →  bigger idea.
Contradiction. The structural signature laid down in Phase 4, read out fully — where what a
person says and what a person does diverge. Revealed, never judged.
Narrative. The compression of thousands of events into the story they actually form — a
homecoming story, a reinvention story — the way humans actually hold their own lives.
Identity. Not what a person says they are, but who keeps showing up across patterns, states,
relationships, and decisions over time. It emerges; it isn't stored.
Prediction. Trajectory projection — if the last many months continue unchanged, where does
this go. Not fortune-telling. The shape of the line extended.
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 20 / 21
IN ONE BREATH
The directive, compressed
Track one, always first The live product stays standing and cared for. Monitoring, bug
windows, connector health, polish. Every day, no matter what's
being built.
Track two, in parallel, now The Chronic build starts now, alongside track one — never instead of
it.
Ship on ready The instant anything user-visible works in the chat, it ships that day
and the founder is told. Built to plug in.
Anchor everything Every entity, relation, and edge carries its receipt to the exact source
and span. No claim EYES can't back. No exceptions, no "later."
The order is fixed Perception →  Entity →  Relationship →  Temporal →  community. Pace
is yours; sequence is not.
Substrate is locked Bi-temporal knowledge graph. Graphiti. Neo4j community or Kuzu
underneath.
Schemas are founder-owned v0 is written here so you can start today. It will be refined. The tools
reconfigure without a rebuild.
Adopt, don't reinvent GLiNER, GLiREL, Graphiti, Splink, Leiden — all open source, all
proven, mostly free. The build is configuration. The moat is the
schema and the anchoring.
A daily document Did / finished / doing tomorrow. Same shape, every day. Mechanism
yours; cadence and structure mandated.
Build the foundation properly, all the way, before reaching for the
organs above it. The order is the strategy.
EYES — EVERYTHING YOU EVER SAID
CONFIDENTIAL · CRESCENT MOON ENGINEERING & FOUNDER OFFICE ONLY
EYES — CHRONIC LAYER BUILD DIRECTIVE CONFIDENTIAL · DO NOT DISTRIBUTE
V1.0 · 25 JUNE 2026 · FOUNDER OFFICE PAGE 21 / 21